Hello there.
In this video, we are going to look at concurrent applications. In general terms, what does it mean
to make an application concurrent?
There are two main cases.
Going back to the client server relationship, we mentioned earlier, there was the server side and
on the other hand, there is the client side and also standalone applications.
With server applications, it is usually fairly easy to see how to make it concurrent. Typically
a server receives lots of requests from different clients, so it is quite natural to create a new thread
to handle each request.
Usually there are only a few basic operations, for example, with a database server, you may be asked
to return some data or create a new table and populate it.
So it is quite obvious where the concurrent tasks are and how to write them, at least in principle!
Data which is shared between threads. It is pretty obvious what that is. If you are writing a database
server than you already have code which supports transactions, and you can use that for protecting
shared data.
For client applications or standalone user applications, it is not quite so simple.
Usually there is only one person using a program instance, so you cannot gain concurrency between users.
When people that use an application or a client, they tend to follow a sequential workflow. For example,
you can open a document, make some changes, save your document, print it out, and that is all done
in sequence.
There is not really much scope for doing things concurrently.
The data that the program uses that you might want to share between threats tends to be hidden away
inside functions or objects in the application.
It is not really out in the open like it is in servers.
And also there is not any easy way to manage shared data.
Concurrency and responsiveness. We have basically looked at this before. When the application does a
operation that takes a long time, it is blocked and it cannot do anything else.
If we make the application multithreaded, the user interface will run in its own thread, which is
always in the foreground.
So it is always available to respond to user actions.
And then each of these tasks where the application does its work, such as saving a document, preparing
a print preview and so on, is run in its own thread.
And these threads can run in the background, asynchronously.
They communicate with the main thread.
They could use message queues, which is a popular technique.
And also, the communication can cause the user interface thread to change state. For example, if
you are doing an operation, then some of the menu items might be greyed out, or it might show an hourglass
or a progress counter, and that can be flexible depending on what is actually happening in the background.
All threads have access to the memory space and can easily share data, so you could use global or
static variables in the application for sharing that.
However, you can have different threads accessing the same data concurrently.
And if threads try to modify the same variable at the same time, then you can get data corruption. And
these variables need to be protected,
so only one threat at a time can access them.
The traditional approach is to use a lock, so the variable is locked and only one thread is allowed in
to access it at a time.
There's also lock-free programming using something called atomic variables.
And then finally, you can use functional programming techniques where you do not actually share data.
This course is mainly going to be looking at the traditional programming technique with locks. We will
mention the others briefly, but the main focus is going to be on locks.
So here's an example of how a threaded client application could work.
We have some application like Word, for example, which is going to index a document.
So it's about to start up a new thread to do the indexing.
The main thread on the GUI is going to disable most of the user interface functionality.
So you cannot click on most of the menu items, but you can still move the window around and maybe use
a few things.
The GUI thread then displays a dialogue box so the user can cancel the process.
Then the thread which is doing the index will start.
It may well be that the data is in some kind of tree structure which allows for vectorized processing,
which we will explain later on.
So the indexing thread can use a parallel sorting algorithm to sort the data and work out where all
the items are and how to organize this index.
Every now and again, the indexing method will send a message to the GUI thread saying, "I have completed
(so much) of the process" and the GUI can update its progress bar to show X percent.
Then finally, the indexing thread sends a message to the GUI thread, saying, "I have finished" and then the
GUI can re-enable the user interface, so the dialogue box will disappear and the disabled menu items will
start working again.
Okay, so that's it for this
video.
I'll see you next time.